\chapter{Conclusions}


Conclusion
Executive Summary

This chapter summarizes the main findings of the project and evaluates them from an applied software-engineering perspective. First, the original objective and the research questions are restated in terms of the experiments that were actually performed. Subsequently, the methodological choices that defined the final system are reviewed, including the closed candidate pool, grouped data partitions, leakage controls, the fixed-role multi-agent pipeline, and the dynamic tool-calling alternative. The quantitative results are then interpreted together with their latency, cost, and reproducibility implications. Finally, the principal limitations are discussed and a prioritized set of engineering and research recommendations is proposed.

The project addressed synonym identification for English academic and domain-specific terms as a closed-pool ranking problem. Given an input term, the system is required to rank candidates from a predefined vocabulary and place the corresponding gold synonym as high as possible. This formulation differs from unrestricted synonym generation because the final answer must belong to the fixed candidate vocabulary. The design was intentional: even methods involving free-form Large Language Model (LLM) generation ultimately used the generated text as a retrieval query and returned a candidate from the controlled vocabulary.

Under these conditions, the results indicate that the strongest solution was not obtained by maximizing agent autonomy. Instead, the best-performing configuration combined a fixed-role multi-agent pipeline with deterministic semantic retrieval and a constrained LLM reranking stage. The final pipeline used a local generator based on llama3.2:3b, semantic representations from intfloat/e5-base-v2, weighted multi-query fusion, and qwen/qwen3-32b as an external reranker. On the fallback-verified held-out test evaluation, this configuration achieved Hit@1 = 0.830, Hit@3 = 0.938, Hit@5 = 0.948, and MRR = 0.884.

The main engineering conclusion is therefore more specific than stating that LLMs improve synonym ranking. The experiments suggest that LLMs were useful when assigned narrow and well-controlled responsibilities, while deterministic retrieval remained responsible for candidate grounding. LLM-based query expansion improved the retrieval stage, and a sufficiently capable reranker improved the ordering of already retrieved candidates. However, weaker rerankers, wider candidate pools, lexical fusion, and increased agent autonomy did not consistently improve the system. This result is compatible with research showing that LLM-generated query expansions can strengthen dense retrieval, while also supporting the broader engineering principle that tool use and generation should be evaluated as components rather than assumed to be beneficial by themselves.

At the same time, the final numbers should not be interpreted as evidence that the problem has been solved generally. The experiment concerns one dataset, one predefined candidate vocabulary, one grouped split with a single fixed random seed, and a partially nondeterministic external reranking service. Paired statistical significance testing has been reported for two comparisons - an exact McNemar test on the validation expansion-versus-reranking comparison (p $\approx$ 0.0044) and on the original test-split reranking-versus-no-reranking comparison (p $\approx$ 0.0025), both in the Results chapter - but two further comparisons remain untested: the fallback-verified test run against each baseline, and the fixed-versus-dynamic architecture Hit@1 difference on validation. Consequently, large performance differences can reasonably be treated as strong experimental evidence under the tested conditions, whereas differences of only a few percentage points should remain qualified until the remaining paired analyses are completed. Statistical testing is particularly important when several systems are evaluated on the same examples and their aggregate scores are close.
Objectives and Research Questions

The overall objective was to design and evaluate a practical system capable of identifying the intended synonym of an academic or domain-specific English term from a predefined vocabulary. The project progressively investigated whether increasingly sophisticated retrieval and LLM-based components could improve the ranking of the correct candidate while maintaining explicit control over leakage, latency, and reproducibility. The methodology files show that approximately forty candidate configurations were explored through a common evaluation harness rather than through isolated demonstrations.

The supplied project documents do not contain one canonical numbered list of research questions. Therefore, the following questions are an operational restatement of what the experiments actually tested. Before final submission, their wording should be synchronized verbatim with the research questions presented in the Introduction.
Research question	Conclusion supported by the experiments
Can semantic retrieval and LLM-assisted query expansion improve closed-pool synonym ranking compared with a simple embedding baseline?	Yes, under the tested conditions. Replacing MiniLM with E5 improved the baseline substantially, and adding weighted LLM query expansion produced a further large improvement.
Does LLM reranking improve the ordering of retrieved synonym candidates, and does reranker capability matter?	Yes, but not universally. The local 2B reranker reduced performance, whereas the 32B Qwen reranker produced the strongest observed results.
Does a dynamic tool-calling agent outperform a fixed-role pipeline when downstream retrieval and reranking components are controlled?	No in the reported validation experiment. The dynamic agent retrieved some complementary candidates but had lower aggregate accuracy and approximately twice the latency of the fixed pipeline.

The first question is supported by a clear experimental progression. The original all-MiniLM-L6-v2 baseline reached a test Hit@1 of 0.536. Replacing it with e5-base-v2 increased Hit@1 to 0.603. Subsequently, LLM query expansion combined with weighted E5 retrieval increased Hit@1 to 0.768 in the best local-only configuration. Finally, a strong reranker increased the fallback-verified result to 0.830. The use of E5 as a dense retrieval model is consistent with its original design as a general-purpose single-vector text representation model, while the use of LLM-generated query variants is also consistent with previous work showing that generated expansions can improve dense retrieval.

The second question produced an important negative as well as positive result. A reranker should not be considered beneficial simply because it is based on an LLM. In the controlled validation comparison, the local qwen3.5:2b reranker reduced Hit@1 from 0.784 to 0.768, whereas qwen/qwen3-32b increased it to 0.851 on the same upstream retrieval configuration. Therefore, the useful contribution was not ``reranking'' in the abstract, but reranking with a model sufficiently capable of distinguishing strict synonymy from broader semantic relatedness.

The third question also produced a measured result rather than a general claim about agent systems. The dynamic tool-calling architecture allowed an LLM to decide how often retrieval should be invoked and which paraphrases should be searched, resembling the tool-selection behavior studied in ReAct and Toolformer. However, when both architectures were evaluated with E5 retrieval and the same Qwen 32B reranker, the fixed pipeline reached Hit@1 = 0.851 and MRR = 0.882 on validation, compared with 0.830 and 0.866 for the dynamic agent. The corresponding average latencies were 9.08 and 18.96 seconds per term.

This comparison should be interpreted carefully. The fixed architecture may reasonably be described as a constrained fixed-role multi-agent system, because a generator agent and a reranker agent perform specialized LLM-based tasks. However, orchestration is centralized and deterministic: the agents do not negotiate, allocate tasks among themselves, or dynamically define the execution graph. Consequently, the project demonstrates the usefulness of specialized agents embedded in a controlled pipeline rather than a general advantage of decentralized multi-agent reasoning.
Methodological Synthesis

The methodology was built around four decisions that are particularly important for interpreting the results: the task was formulated as closed-pool ranking, data partitions were grouped by input term, the candidate vocabulary was separated conceptually from row-specific ground truth, and system selection was performed on validation rather than directly on the final test results.

The usable dataset contained 969 rows after one degenerate identity pair was removed. The data were partitioned into 581 training rows, 194 validation rows, and 194 test rows, using a fixed seed of 42. Importantly, partitioning was performed by unique input term rather than independently by row. This prevents duplicated input terms with different valid synonyms from appearing across different partitions.

The global candidate vocabulary was constructed from synonym values across the complete dataset. Under the explicitly defined closed-pool task, this was not treated as label leakage because the system was allowed to know the vocabulary of possible answers; what was prohibited was consulting the gold synonym belonging to the specific row being predicted before producing its ranking. This distinction is methodologically defensible only because the task is explicitly defined as closed-pool ranking. It would no longer be valid if the thesis claimed that the system performs unconstrained open-vocabulary synonym discovery.

The best system then applied four stages. First, the local generator produced up to nine query variants at temperature zero while retaining the original term. Second, all queries were represented using e5-base-v2 with the expected query-prefix convention. Third, cosine-similarity scores against the fixed candidate vocabulary were fused using a weighted average in which the original query received three times the weight of each generated variant. Finally, the top five candidates were sent to qwen/qwen3-32b, which was allowed to reorder them but not to introduce new candidates or access the ground-truth synonym.

This architecture makes the source of each improvement relatively traceable. Query expansion was used to increase semantic coverage before retrieval; weighted fusion was used to prevent generated variants from overwhelming the original input; and reranking was applied only after the search space had been reduced to five controlled candidates. Research on LLM query expansion similarly finds that generated contextual material can improve retrieval, while the E5 architecture was specifically developed for dense text retrieval and related embedding tasks.

The dynamic alternative followed a different design. Instead of executing a fixed sequence, one LLM could decide which retrieval queries to issue through a tool interface. The conceptual motivation for this approach is well established in work such as ReAct and Toolformer, where language models combine reasoning or generation with external actions and tools. Nevertheless, additional autonomy introduced additional planning calls and greater opportunity for semantic query drift. In this dataset, the dynamic agent recovered several candidates that the fixed pipeline missed, but those gains were offset by more regressions, and overall performance remained lower.

Therefore, one of the strongest methodological findings is that control flow itself became an experimental variable. The fixed pipeline produced more stable and efficient behavior because the division of responsibilities was explicit. The dynamic architecture produced genuinely different retrieval behavior and occasionally improved recall, but it also introduced more variability. The result does not establish that fixed architectures are universally superior to agents; it establishes that, for this specific closed-pool ranking task, additional autonomy did not compensate for its computational and precision costs.
Results and Interpretation

The principal held-out test results are summarized in Table below. The final row uses the 2026-07-22 fallback-verified rerun identified by both the methodology and the project README as the trustworthy final evaluation.
Configuration	Hit@1	Hit@3	Hit@5	MRR	Average latency per term	Compute / cost note
Original embedding baseline, MiniLM	0.536	0.722	0.773	0.629	~0.022 s	Local embedding
embedding\_e5	0.603	0.789	0.871	0.704	~0.02--0.03 s	Local embedding
llm\_expansion\_weighted\_n3	0.768	0.902	0.933	0.835	~0.72 s	Local LLM + E5; no paid API
Final fixed-role pipeline + Qwen reranker	0.830	0.938	0.948	0.884	13.32 s	Qwen 32B through OpenRouter; approximately \$0.03 for 194 rows

These values are reported in the experiment history and methodological write-up.

Relative to the original MiniLM baseline, the final verified system improved Hit@1 by 29.4 absolute percentage points and MRR by 25.5 points. Relative to E5 without LLM assistance, the improvements were 22.7 and 18.0 points respectively. Most importantly for understanding the contribution of the final reranking stage, the final system improved over the best local-only llm\_expansion\_weighted\_n3 configuration by 6.2 points in Hit@1 and 4.9 points in MRR. These differences indicate that the final gain did not originate from a single component; improvements accumulated through better semantic retrieval, query expansion, fusion, and finally reranking.

The full-dataset descriptive run provides a second perspective. After the configuration had already been selected, the final system was evaluated over all 969 usable rows and obtained Hit@1 = 0.822, Hit@3 = 0.932, Hit@5 = 0.945, MRR = 0.877, and an average latency of 11.84 seconds per term. Of the 969 examples, 797 were ranked correctly at position one. This full-dataset evaluation was explicitly used for descriptive reporting and failure analysis rather than model selection.

The relationship between Hit@1 and Hit@5 is particularly informative. The final full-dataset Hit@5 of 0.945 means that the retrieval stages already placed the correct synonym in the shortlist for the large majority of examples. Remaining failures were divided into 119 ranking errors, where the gold synonym was retrieved but not placed first, and 53 retrieval misses, where the gold synonym never reached the top five. Consequently, ranking and retrieval should be treated as separate engineering problems. A reranker can improve the former, but by construction it cannot recover a synonym that has not been retrieved.

This separation also explains the effect of the Qwen reranker. Among the 916 full-dataset examples in which the gold synonym had been retrieved before reranking, 136 improved in rank, 732 remained unchanged, and 48 worsened. Moreover, 43 of those 48 regressions involved candidates that had already been correct at rank one before the reranker changed their order. The reranking stage was therefore clearly net-positive, but it was not monotonically beneficial. This is important for the conclusion because it prevents the stronger model from being described as an infallible semantic judge.

The comparison between reranker sizes reinforces this point. On the same upstream validation shortlist, the local 2B model reduced Hit@1 from 0.784 to 0.768, whereas the 32B Qwen model reached 0.851. The middle 9B OpenRouter model was abandoned before a usable full comparison was obtained because of service reliability problems. Therefore, model scale and model availability were both relevant engineering variables. The results indicate that a reranking stage should be accepted only after empirical validation; simply adding an LLM layer may increase latency while reducing accuracy.

A similarly concrete trade-off appeared in the architecture comparison. With E5 retrieval and the same 32B reranker, the fixed architecture obtained Hit@1 = 0.851, Hit@5 = 0.923, and MRR = 0.882 on validation, compared with 0.830, 0.907, and 0.866 for the dynamic tool-calling agent. Average latency was 9.08 seconds for the fixed pipeline and 18.96 seconds for the dynamic alternative. The comparison therefore suggests that additional planning autonomy was not cost-effective in the tested configuration.

Formal statistical significance has been established for two of the comparisons discussed above, but not for the architecture comparison specifically. The Results chapter reports an exact two-sided McNemar test for the validation expansion-versus-reranking comparison (16 rows moving from incorrect to correct, 3 in the opposite direction, p $\approx$ 0.0044) and for the original test-split reranking-versus-no-reranking comparison (21 versus 5, p $\approx$ 0.0025); both indicate the corresponding improvements are unlikely to be explained by symmetric paired sampling noise alone. The fixed-versus-dynamic architecture difference (0.851 versus 0.830 on validation, a 2.1-point gap) has not been tested this way, and the experiment files explicitly recognize that differences of approximately two or three percentage points can be difficult to distinguish from small-sample and LLM-run variability at (n=194). Candidate-set inspection provides strong evidence that the architectural difference was mechanically real rather than merely a reranker repeat-run artifact, but this is not equivalent to a formal significance test.

For the final thesis, the two remaining paired statistical analyses identified in the Results chapter should be completed: an exact McNemar test for the fallback-verified test run against each baseline (embedding\_e5 and llm\_expansion\_weighted\_n3, joined row-by-row - not yet done because the required contingency counts are not available from aggregate Hit@1 percentages alone), and the same test for the fixed-versus-dynamic architecture comparison. Because systems were evaluated on the same examples, paired tests should be preferred over independent-sample comparisons. For Hit@1, McNemar's test remains the appropriate procedure, as already demonstrated for the two comparisons above; for rank-based metrics such as MRR or NDCG, paired resampling or randomization approaches can be considered. More generally, NLP evaluation literature recommends matching the significance procedure to the evaluation setting rather than treating small aggregate score differences as inherently meaningful.

One numerical issue must also be resolved before submission. README.md and METHODOLOGY.md identify the original 20 July run as Hit@1 = 0.851 and the 22 July fallback-verified rerun as Hit@1 = 0.830. In contrast, RESULTS\_SUMMARY.md reverses those date labels. The conclusion should use the 0.830 fallback-verified value unless inspection of the canonical experiment\_log.csv and corresponding summary JSON proves otherwise. The contradiction should be corrected in every thesis source before the document is frozen.
Limitations and Threats to Validity

The first limitation concerns the task definition itself. The candidate vocabulary is created from the dataset's complete synonym column. Under a closed-pool ranking formulation this is an intended property of the task rather than leakage, because the system does not inspect the row-specific answer before ranking. However, it substantially restricts external validity. The reported results demonstrate the ability to rank a known vocabulary, not the ability to discover arbitrary unseen synonyms. In a production environment where a correct term may fall outside the predefined vocabulary, the current architecture cannot return that answer.

A second limitation concerns the dataset. The final evaluation contains 194 rows, and only one grouped split generated with seed 42 was used. Grouping by unique input term is a strong protection against direct overlap between partitions, but one particular split may still be easier or harder for a method by chance. The observed validation-to-test differences for several methods provide evidence that sampling variance is non-negligible. Consequently, a future robustness study should repeat the grouped partitioning with several seeds and report mean performance together with variation across splits.

The third limitation is LLM nondeterminism. The project observed that the local generator could produce slightly different outputs across independent processes even with temperature=0. More importantly, repeated evaluations of the same Qwen reranking configuration produced different candidate orders and approximately two percentage points of Hit@1 variation. The identical final configuration produced Hit@1 = 0.851 in one test run and 0.830 in the later fallback-verified run. Therefore, temperature zero should not be described as guaranteeing complete reproducibility.

The external API introduces a related infrastructure threat. OpenRouter can route a model request across different providers and can use provider fallbacks when a selected endpoint is unavailable. Its official documentation states that provider routing is dynamic and that automatic provider fallback is enabled by default. OpenRouter also documents that provider failures, fallback behavior, account state, and routing choices can affect latency. Consequently, recording only the high-level model identifier is insufficient for strong reproducibility. The returned model identifier, provider information where available, request parameters, timestamp, retries, and fallback status should also be preserved.

This issue was not merely theoretical in the project. The initially selected 9B Qwen endpoint produced repeated availability failures, and a previous absence of explicit fallback accounting allowed failed reranking calls to revert silently to the original ordering. The evaluation harness was subsequently improved to record reranker\_fallback, count failed calls, retry them, checkpoint long runs, and refuse to report results while invalid fallback rows remain. These changes substantially strengthen experimental traceability, but they also demonstrate why infrastructure state forms part of the experimental conditions when external LLM services are used.

Hardware variability is another limitation. Early experiments documented a local RTX 4050 with 6 GB of GPU memory, including contention when multiple local workloads were executed concurrently. In addition, the local 2B reranker was observed to be slower than the remotely hosted 32B model, demonstrating that parameter count alone cannot be used to predict end-to-end latency in this environment. Therefore, latency measurements should be interpreted as observed system measurements, not intrinsic properties of the models.

Several methodological analyses also remain incomplete. The 581-row training partition was reserved but not used to fit or calibrate any component. No systematic prompt-sensitivity experiment was completed, despite this having been identified as desirable during the project. One otherwise relevant embedding model could not be evaluated because of an environment compatibility problem. These gaps do not invalidate the reported comparison, but they constrain the breadth of the conclusions.

Finally, the dataset itself contains semantic ambiguity. Failure analysis found many cases in which the predicted term was a plausible near-synonym even though it did not exactly match the single gold label, for example distinctions such as funding versus investing or closely related terminology around conflict resolution. A single-reference exact-ranking evaluation can therefore classify linguistically defensible alternatives as failures. Future work should distinguish genuine semantic errors from dataset-label ambiguity, potentially through expert annotation or multiple acceptable gold synonyms.
Engineering Recommendations and Reproducibility

Before further optimization is attempted, the immediate priority should be to freeze a coherent and auditable experimental record. The project already contains a unified evaluation harness, per-run logs, per-row result files, explicit fallback tracking, and grouped splits. These are strong foundations. However, the final thesis should reference one canonical result source so that the date inversion currently present in RESULTS\_SUMMARY.md cannot propagate into tables, the abstract, the presentation, or the library metadata.

The following reproducibility checklist is recommended for the final archive.
Reproducibility item	Required content	Current status
Dataset	Source, cleaned row count, excluded row, file checksum	Source and row logic documented; checksum should be added
Split definition	Grouping key, 60/20/20 proportions, seed 42, exact split files	Documented
Candidate pool	Construction procedure and explicit leakage rule	Documented
Code state	Git commit or immutable release tag	Identified: most recent commit touching the project's code is ec1fb8468ca84c2b34f94cd4d238346aa4cb477e (2026-08-08); should be re-confirmed at submission time
Local models	Exact model IDs, quantization if applicable, Ollama version	Fully documented: llama3.2:3b runs at Q4\_K\_M, qwen3.5:2b at Q8\_0, Ollama 0.30.10, all confirmed via ollama show
Embedding stack	e5-base-v2, package version, prefix configuration	Model, prefixes, and exact installed package versions (e.g. sentence-transformers 5.6.0, transformers 5.14.1) now documented; still not pinned in a committed lock file
Prompts	Exact generator, tool-agent, and reranker prompts	Present verbatim in source code as named constants (quoted in full in the Models chapter); should also be archived in an appendix
External API	Model ID, request parameters, provider/routing information, timestamp, retries	Model ID and retry policy documented; provider routing and the reranker's "thinking" mode are confirmed to be left at their default (neither is explicitly pinned in the client code) - this should be a deliberate decision, not an unexamined default
Hardware	GPU, CPU, RAM, operating system, CUDA/PyTorch versions	Fully documented: AMD Ryzen 7 7840HS, 14 GiB RAM, Ubuntu 26.04 LTS, RTX 4050 Laptop GPU (6 GB), NVIDIA driver 595.84, PyTorch 2.13.0 (CUDA 13.0) - all confirmed on the development machine
Raw predictions	Per-row candidates, ranks, fallback indicator	Already generated
Final metrics	One canonical summary produced from raw predictions	Available, but date inconsistency must be corrected
Statistical analysis	Paired significance tests and uncertainty estimates	Partially reported: two McNemar exact tests (p $\approx$ 0.0044, p $\approx$ 0.0025) and Wilson 95\% CIs for Hit@1 across the main configurations are now in the Results chapter; still missing for the fallback-verified run specifically and for the fixed-versus-dynamic architecture comparison

For the final thesis package, prompts, full hyperparameter values, dataset-preparation rules, and environment information should be placed in appendices or attachments rather than expanding the Results chapter unnecessarily. The SUPSI thesis template explicitly distinguishes appendices contained in the thesis file from separate attachments such as code or experimental material. A practical organization would therefore place prompts, detailed configurations, and supplementary error tables in appendices, while the source repository and machine-readable result files would be treated as accompanying project material.

A second engineering recommendation is to preserve two operating profiles rather than treating the most accurate configuration as the only useful output of the project. The E5-only system requires approximately a few hundredths of a second per term and no external API. The llm\_expansion\_weighted\_n3 configuration reaches substantially higher accuracy at approximately 0.72 seconds per term while remaining local and free of paid inference. The Qwen-reranked system provides the best accuracy but increases latency to approximately 9--13 seconds per term and introduces an external-service dependency. Consequently, deployment should expose a deliberate accuracy--latency--cost policy rather than selecting one configuration universally.

For an API-backed deployment, retries and explicit failure handling should remain mandatory. OpenRouter supports provider and model fallback mechanisms, but these mechanisms optimize availability rather than scientific reproducibility. Therefore, the application should continue to record whether reranking actually occurred, and a fallback to the unreranked order should be reported as a degraded execution path rather than silently treated as equivalent to a normal prediction.

The external API dependency also creates a model-governance requirement. Because routing can depend on current provider availability, provider performance, and configured routing policy, latency results measured during the thesis should not be used as a permanent service-level guarantee. For deployment, the exact provider may be pinned when reproducibility is more important than availability, or routing may remain flexible when uptime is prioritized. In either case, the choice should be documented.
Future Work and Next-Steps Timeline

Future work should prioritize robustness and understanding before further Hit@1 optimization. The existing system has already produced a large improvement over the original baseline. Additional small accuracy gains are less valuable scientifically if they cannot be separated from API variation or data-split variance.

The recommended priorities are summarized below.
Priority	Proposed work	Purpose
Immediate	Apply the 20 July / 22 July date fix to RESULTS\_SUMMARY.md itself - already reconciled against EXPERIMENTS\_LOG.md and consistently reported as Hit@1 = 0.830 (verified) throughout every chapter of this thesis, but the project's own RESULTS\_SUMMARY.md file still has the two dates swapped	Prevent the source project's own summary file from contradicting the thesis
Immediate	Freeze code, prompts, dependencies, model identifiers, and dataset hashes	Make the submitted experiment reproducible
High	Complete the two still-missing paired significance analyses: the fallback-verified test run against each baseline, and the fixed-versus-dynamic architecture Hit@1 difference (two other comparisons are already McNemar-tested in the Results chapter)	Distinguish effect size from statistically supported differences
High	Repeat the fixed final configuration several times on validation without further tuning	Quantify Qwen reranker run-to-run variability
High	Repeat grouped evaluation across several random seeds	Estimate sensitivity to the particular 60/20/20 partition
Medium	Combine the fixed and dynamic architectures' candidate sets before one shared reranking pass	Test whether complementary retrieval can improve recall without retaining dynamic-agent regressions
Medium	Use the unused training partition to calibrate fusion or confidence parameters	Replace manually selected values with a genuinely fitted component
Medium	Evaluate one or more smaller but capable rerankers under matched conditions	Investigate whether most of the 32B gain can be retained with lower latency and cost
Medium	Run a controlled prompt-sensitivity experiment	Quantify dependence on generator and reranker wording
Longer term	Evaluate on another dataset or an open-vocabulary synonym task	Measure external validity beyond the known candidate pool
Longer term	Introduce expert or multi-reference evaluation for ambiguous synonyms	Separate dataset-label ambiguity from true ranking errors

The most promising architectural experiment follows directly from the fixed-versus-dynamic comparison. The dynamic agent recovered several gold synonyms that were not retrieved by the fixed pipeline, which means the two retrieval strategies contain complementary information. However, the dynamic agent also produced more regressions and approximately doubled latency. Therefore, a reasonable next design is not necessarily to replace the fixed architecture with the dynamic one. Instead, both systems could be used to contribute candidates to a shared deduplicated pool, after which a single reranker would make the final decision. This would test whether the dynamic agent's additional recall can be retained without granting it control over the final ranking.

A second high-value direction concerns the 53 full-dataset retrieval misses. Since these cases never reach the reranker, additional reranking capacity cannot address them. Previous attempts to widen the candidate pool, inject direct LLM guesses, apply abbreviation expansion, or mix lexical retrieval did not produce reliable aggregate improvements. Therefore, future work should investigate candidate-generation mechanisms that are meaningfully different from those already tested, such as domain-specific lexical resources, learned retrieval on the training partition, alternative dense representations, or an explicit open-vocabulary fallback.

A third direction concerns statistical robustness. The repeated Qwen results demonstrate that a single evaluation run is not sufficient to estimate very small system differences reliably. A future study should therefore report repeated-run distributions for stochastic components and paired uncertainty estimates for method comparisons. This follows established NLP evaluation practice, in which aggregate improvements are strengthened by significance analysis rather than interpreted solely from the difference between two point estimates.

The recommended sequence is illustrated below.

Immediate: reconcile final metrics
and identify canonical results

Freeze thesis artifacts
code, data, prompts, models, environment

Robustness analysis
repeat validation runs and paired tests

Multi-seed grouped evaluation
estimate split variance

Architecture follow-up
fixed + dynamic candidate fusion

Retrieval-miss research
new candidate-generation strategies

Deployment evaluation
accuracy, latency, cost, privacy

External validation
new dataset / open-vocabulary task

The first two stages should be completed before thesis submission because they concern correctness and reproducibility of the existing work. The remaining stages are appropriate as future work and should not delay the final report unless required by the supervisor.
Ethical, Confidentiality, and Final Takeaways

No personal or sensitive user data are described in the supplied experimental materials; the task operates on academic and domain terminology. Nevertheless, the final architecture sends the input term and its candidate shortlist to an external API for reranking. Therefore, confidentiality becomes relevant if the same implementation is later applied to proprietary terminology, unpublished documents, or company data. OpenRouter provides routing controls related to provider data collection and Zero Data Retention policies, which can be configured when external data-handling constraints apply. For a real deployment, these settings should be reviewed together with institutional or company requirements rather than assuming that an external API is acceptable by default.

This consideration also connects directly to SUPSI submission requirements. The DTI library metadata form explicitly requests whether a company was involved and contains a dedicated field for confidentiality requirements and other comments. The catalogue form additionally requires a separate abstract of no more than 500 characters including spaces. The thesis template requires Italian and English summaries, numerical bibliographic references, and clearly identified appendices and attachments. Consequently, the final thesis, library metadata, catalogue abstract, presentation, and repository description should all use the same final title, the same verified metrics, and the same confidentiality statement.

The principal scientific takeaway is that the project achieved a substantial improvement in closed-pool synonym ranking by progressively replacing weak components with better-targeted ones rather than by increasing architectural complexity indiscriminately. E5 provided a stronger semantic retrieval basis than the original embedding model. LLM query expansion then increased the probability that the correct synonym entered a useful part of the ranking. Weighted fusion was necessary to prevent generated variants from dominating the original term. Finally, a capable LLM reranker substantially improved the ordering of the top candidates.

At the same time, several negative results were equally important. BM25-based fusion did not improve the task, generic cross-encoders frequently preferred related concepts over strict synonyms, larger embedding models were not automatically better, weaker LLM rerankers could actively decrease accuracy, widening the reranker pool introduced harmful distractors, and the dynamic tool-calling agent did not outperform the fixed pipeline under matched downstream conditions. These findings show that model scale, agent autonomy, and pipeline complexity are not useful objectives by themselves. Each component must provide measurable task-specific value.

The final architecture can therefore be characterized as a controlled hybrid system. Deterministic retrieval provides grounding and defines the permitted candidate space, while LLM agents perform bounded tasks for which generative semantic reasoning provides measurable benefit. This design also limits the consequences of hallucination because the final reranker cannot invent an answer outside its shortlist. Under the tested closed-pool conditions, the fixed-role approach produced the best observed balance of accuracy and controllability, although it incurred a substantial latency and external-dependency cost compared with local retrieval alternatives.

The remaining errors clarify where future improvements should be directed. Ranking errors remain partly addressable through better semantic discrimination, whereas retrieval misses require improvements before the reranking stage. In addition, some apparent errors reflect genuine ambiguity between multiple plausible synonyms rather than obvious system failures. Therefore, future development should focus not only on increasing aggregate Hit@1, but also on improving candidate coverage, measuring uncertainty, evaluating multiple acceptable synonyms, and establishing stronger reproducibility across data splits and LLM runs.

Overall, the results support the conclusion that carefully constrained cooperation between retrieval models and specialized LLM agents is more effective for this task than either simple embedding retrieval or greater agent autonomy alone. The strongest contribution of the project is therefore not only the final Hit@1 value, but the experimentally supported decomposition of where performance gains originate, where additional complexity fails to help, and which engineering trade-offs must be considered when such a system is moved from experimental evaluation toward practical use.
